# Topics for discussion
- What a sensible long term design could be.
- What steps we can take into that direction which makes v2/actions fast now.

Job of Midgard: fetching(a), parsing(b), aggregating(c), serving(d)
a) take events which have key value pairs.
  * Currently fetching is done together with parsing (b)
  * We might choose to store the raw events in SQL and do the parsing separately, so if we have to change
    parsing logic we don't need to fetch everything again.
b) parse the events, map them into separate tables.
  * Currently this is written in go, but if we store the raw events we may choose to do it in SQL.
  * This also contains calculation of the prices, which logically could be part of (c)
  * We could change parsing to SQL if it has advantages.
  * We need to add order within a block to the events to have full ordering over events.
c) calculate aggregations over them.
  * in order to have quicker queries we set up aggregation tables in timescale.
  * unfortunately timescale aggregations work on simple tables only, not on views.
  * We already have one instance where we created a view and a materialized table with a watermark.
  * We need more complicated aggregations, e.g. we want to create an actions view which is fast.
  * We may choose to do the aggregations in golang or in SQL.
    - Doing it in golang is easer to understand for new devs.
    - Creating the datastructures in golang might have limitations. E.g. it's good for latest prices,
      but not good for metrics where we need full history (exalmple?)
d) serve queries quickly
  * Originally Midgard was serving in O(number of events). This is still the case for v2/actions
  * Currently Midgard is mostly O(number of days).
  * We need to make it O(log(number of events))

Main question currently: How to calculate the aggregations (c)?
* It's not immutable, parts of the action change (e.g. pending->success).
* Should we have multiple tables with or update existing rows?
* Should it the generation be in SQL or Go?
* Should we use timescale or do it ourselves with watermarks?
* How to make v2/actions pagination fast? Continuation token? Date filters? Number of results estimate?
* How to make v2/actions fast with filters (address, txid, pool, type)?
* How to make sure that Midgard reports healthy only after aggregations?

# Discussion notes

Orthogonal ideas for future:
* Maybe Midgard team should export the first few Million blocks in a file somewhere and commit the hash of
  it in the code.
* Import Midgard tables into Google BigQuery. 9R might choose to do it. Advantages:
  1) Data from other chains are already imported, one could correlate and follow the transactions
     truly end to end.
  2) We could run queries on many machines which would be too slow on singular Midgard.
  3) We need to check, but maybe clients who want to run expensive queries would not DOS us, but
     they might be able to pay of it themselves.
* There is a possibility to do indexing with a mapreduce (e.g. by shards of 100k blocks).
  Probably there will be many bottlenecks before we would arrive to this, this is a far future possibility.

We've decided not to make concrete design decisions, but to play around / try out different solutions
to the v2/actions endpoint and decide on long term goals based on which solution looks good.
Here are some goals we aim short term:
* Think about how tables should look like for making serving super easy. For example the
  actions table should be able to be indexed by current filters, but all metadata needed for
  presentation might go in as unstructured into the tables (e.g. json).
* We will try to do the table population in SQL, but if it's complicated we will try golang too.
  Reasons for SQL: no roundtrips for selects&inserts, easier error handling (e.g. network failure),
  possibility for triggers.
* We need to fix pagination:
  1) second page might give results from first one (time shift)
  2) calculating the 1000th page might need to calculate all results before (limit&offset).
  We need to research pagination for actions. (continuation token? time filters? something else?)
* We need to fix actions ordering. Currently events within a block come in random order,
  which makes v2/actions inconsistent between pages (also Midgard instances).
  1) We plan to add a new column for ordering:
     eventId = height * 1M + event place in block.
